

This a model from the article:  
**Synergism of coupled subsarcolemmal Ca2+ clocks and sarcolemmal voltage clocks confers robust and flexible pacemaker function in a novel pacemaker cell model.**   
Maltsev VA, Lakatta EG. _Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol_ 2009
Mar;296(3):H594-615 [19136600](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19136600) ,  
**Abstract:**   
Recent experimental studies have demonstrated that sinoatrial node cells
(SANC) generate spontaneous, rhythmic, local subsarcolemmal Ca(2+) releases
(Ca(2+) clock), which occur during late diastolic depolarization (DD) and
interact with the classic sarcolemmal voltage oscillator (membrane clock) by
activating Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger current (I(NCX)). This and other
interactions between clocks, however, are not captured by existing essentially
membrane-delimited cardiac pacemaker cell numerical models. Using wide-scale
parametric analysis of classic formulations of membrane clock and Ca(2+)
cycling, we have constructed and initially explored a prototype rabbit SANC
model featuring both clocks. Our coupled oscillator system exhibits greater
robustness and flexibility than membrane clock operating alone. Rhythmic
spontaneous Ca(2+) releases of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)-based Ca(2+) clock
ignite rhythmic action potentials via late DD I(NCX) over much broader ranges
of membrane clock parameters [e.g., L-type Ca(2+) current (I(CaL)) and/or
hyperpolarization-activated ("funny") current (I(f)) conductances]. The system
Ca(2+) clock includes SR and sarcolemmal Ca(2+) fluxes, which optimize cell
Ca(2+) balance to increase amplitudes of both SR Ca(2+) release and late DD
I(NCX) as SR Ca(2+) pumping rate increases, resulting in a broad pacemaker
rate modulation (1.8-4.6 Hz). In contrast, the rate modulation range via
membrane clock parameters is substantially smaller when Ca(2+) clock is
unchanged or lacking. When Ca(2+) clock is disabled, the system parametric
space for fail-safe SANC operation considerably shrinks: without rhythmic late
DD I(NCX) ignition signals membrane clock substantially slows, becomes
dysrhythmic, or halts. In conclusion, the Ca(2+) clock is a new critical
dimension in SANC function. A synergism of the coupled function of Ca(2+) and
membrane clocks confers fail-safe SANC operation at greatly varying rates.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Maltsev VA, Lakatta EG. (2009) - version=1.0**
](http://models.cellml.org/exposure/af75953c3f3a4c87b80124b39f48dbc6)  
The original CellML model was created by:  
**Catherine Lloyd**   
c.lloyd@auckland.ac.nz  
The University of Auckland  

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

